Test doubles and dependency injection episode (#15)
ImperialCollegeLondon/unit_testing_Cpp: _episodes/l1-05-test_doubles.md

---
title: "Tests doubles and dependency injection"
teaching: TBC
exercises: TBC
questions:
- "TBC"
objectives:
- "TBC"
keypoints:
- "TBC"
---

## Testing untestable code

> Sooner or later you will face a piece of code that is not straight forward to write a test for. It might be because it calls a function that requests some data from a piece of hardware. Or because it needs to access a database that it is not available in the testing environment. Or simply because it triggers a complex and time consuming computation process that is only suited to run in a supercomputer. Whatever the reason, you will be in trouble. Moreover, you might want to test if some intermediate result of the calculation, and not just the final output, is a valid one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sooner or later you will face a piece of code that is not straightforward to write a test for. It might be because it calls a function that requests some data from a piece of hardware, or because it needs to access a database that it is not available in the testing environment, or simply because it triggers a complex and time consuming computation process that is only suited to run in a supercomputer. Whatever the reason, you have a problem. Moreover, you might want to test if some intermediate result in the calculation is valid, and not just the final output.
```

There is one possible solution: replace the problematic function by another one that, for the purposes of the test, behaves in a similar manner but without the problematic functionality of the original one. These replacements are called **test doubles**.

### Test doubles

> Test doubles are artificial replacements of functions or objects that prevent - or make more difficult - to test a particular part of the code. Depending exactly of what these replacements do, and also on the programming language, they receive different names. From the [Wikipedia], we have:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Test doubles are artificial replacements of functions or objects that prevent - or hinder - testing a particular part of the code. Depending on what these replacements do, and also on the programming language, they receive different names. From the [Wikipedia], we have:
```

> - **Test stub**: used for providing the tested code with "indirect input", i.e canned answers so that the code can keep running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Test stub**: used for providing the tested code with "indirect input", i.e. canned answers so that the code can keep running.
```

- **Mock object**: used for verifying "indirect output" of the tested code, by first defining the expectations before the tested code is executed.
- **Test spy**: used for verifying "indirect output" of the tested code, by asserting the expectations afterwards, without having defined the expectations before the tested code is executed.
- **Fake object**: used as a simpler implementation, e.g. using an in-memory database in the tests instead of doing real database access.

> - **Dummy object**: used when a parameter is needed for the tested method but without actually needing to use the parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Dummy object**: used when a parameter is needed for the tested method, but when we don't actually need to use the parameter.
```

> Which type of test double to use will depend on the specific code you want to test and what the double is meant to replace. Functions are often replaced with stubs or fakes while objects of more complex classes with multiple methods or attributes require more elaborate mocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which type of test double to use will depend on the specific code you want to test and what the double is meant to replace. Functions are often replaced with stubs or fakes, while objects of complex classes with multiple methods or attributes require more elaborate mocks.
```

Now, the complexity becomes how to use them!

[Wikipedia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_double

### Dependency injection

Consider the following function that normalizes an array according to some definition of norm (ignore whether this is the most performing approach or not):

```cpp
void normalize_v1(int array[], int length)
{
    double norm{calculate_norm(array)};

    for (int i{0}; i < length; ++i)
    {
        array[i] /= norm;
    }
}
```

You need to test it, but you do not want to have to calculate the norm along the way. How would you tell the `normalize` function to use a test double for `calculate_norm` and not the real one?

> Well, you cannot. `calculate_norm` is hardcoded in the definition of `normalize` so replacing it for another function is not possible, specially if we consider that `normalize` will be defined in a particular file within your code and you are testing it somewhere else.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Well, you cannot. `calculate_norm` is hardcoded in the definition of `normalize` so replacing it for another function is not possible, especially if we consider that `normalize` will be defined in a particular file within your code, but you are testing it somewhere else.
```

---
title: "Tests doubles and dependency injection"
teaching: TBC
exercises: TBC
questions:
- "TBC"
objectives:
- "TBC"
keypoints:
- "TBC"
---

## Testing untestable code

> Sooner or later you will face a piece of code that is not straightforward to write a test for. It might be because it calls a function that requests some data from a piece of hardware, or because it needs to access a database that it is not available in the testing environment, or simply because it triggers a complex and time consuming computation process that is only suited to run in a supercomputer. Whatever the reason, you have a problem. Moreover, you might want to test if some intermediate result in the calculation is valid, and not just the final output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sooner or later you will face a piece of code that is not straightforward to write a test for. It might be because it calls a function that requests some data from a piece of hardware, or because it needs to access a database that is not available in the testing environment, or simply because it triggers a complex and time consuming computation process that is only suited to run in a supercomputer. Whatever the reason, you have a problem. Moreover, you might want to test if some intermediate result in the calculation is valid, and not just the final output.
```

- **Test stub**: used for providing the tested code with "indirect input", i.e. canned answers so that the code can keep running.
- **Mock object**: used for verifying "indirect output" of the tested code, by first defining the expectations before the tested code is executed.
- **Test spy**: used for verifying "indirect output" of the tested code, by asserting the expectations afterwards, without having defined the expectations before the tested code is executed.
- **Fake object**: used as a simpler implementation, e.g. using an in-memory database in the tests instead of doing real database access.
- **Dummy object**: used when a parameter is needed for the tested method, but when we don't actually need to use the parameter.

Which type of test double to use will depend on the specific code you want to test and what the double is meant to replace. Functions are often replaced with stubs or fakes, while objects of complex classes with multiple methods or attributes require more elaborate mocks.

Now, the complexity becomes how to use them!

[Wikipedia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_double

### Dependency injection

> Consider the following function that normalizes an array according to some definition of norm (ignore whether this is the most performing approach or not):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider the following function that normalizes an array according to some definition of norm (ignore whether this is the most performant approach or not):
```

```cpp
using ::testing::Return;

TEST(IsAliveTest, Lives) {
  Animal animal = MockAnimal();
  int steps{400};
  double carbs{2000.0};
  double consumed{500.0};

  EXPECT_CALL(animal, walk(steps)).Times(1).WillOnce(Return(consumed));
  EXPECT_CALL(animal, eat(carbs-consumed)).Times(1);
  EXPECT_CALL(animal, die()).Times(0);
  ASSERT_TRUE(is_alive_at_end_of_day(steps, carbs, animal))
}

TEST(IsAliveTest, Dies) {
  Animal animal = MockAnimal();
  int steps{400};
  double carbs{2000.0};
  double consumed{5000.0};

  EXPECT_CALL(animal, walk(steps)).Times(1).WillOnce(Return(consumed));
  EXPECT_CALL(animal, eat(carbs-consumed)).Times(1);
  EXPECT_CALL(animal, die()).Times(1);
  ASSERT_FALSE(is_alive_at_end_of_day(steps, carbs, animal))
}
```

[Google Mock]: https://google.github.io/googletest/gmock_for_dummies.html
[Mocking Cookbook]: https://google.github.io/googletest/gmock_cook_book.html

> ### Mocking is not always the solution
>

> > In the above example, it would have been tricky to test the logic of the function in full without mocks. However, they are not always the solution. Mocks do not work with  top level functions, only with classes. Depending on the complexity of the class, setting up the mock might be too complicated and not worth it for testing the function of interest. Very often, stubs, fakes and dummies will carry you a long way before you need to use mocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> In the above example, it would have been tricky to test the logic of the function in full without mocks. However, they are not always the solution. Mocks do not work with top level functions, only with classes. Depending on the complexity of the class, setting up the mock might be too complicated and not worth it for testing the function of interest. Very often, stubs, fakes and dummies will carry you a long way before you need to use mocks.
```

    {
        array[i] /= norm;
    }
}
```

Compared with the first version, this `normalize` function does exactly the same thing and can be invoked in exactly the same way but, in addition, you can optionally control what specific function is used to calculate the norm. In particular, you can provide a test double that replaces the default `calculate_norm`.

This is called [dependency injection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dependency_injection) and its application goes well beyond testing: it helps make the code more modular and re-usable by making it less intrinsically linked to specific design choices or dependencies. In the example, we could use a different definition of norm - [and there are quite a few!](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norm_(mathematics))

> ### Dependency injection is an important design pattern
>
> Do not disregard the value of dependency injection as an approach only useful in testing. If you design your code with dependency injection in mind, it will become more flexible and powerful. Here we have presented just one way of doing dependency injection, but there are other approaches that might be more suitable to your particular case.
>

> > Having said that, **enabling dependency injection in your code is a must to be able to use any of the test doubles**, including the mocks we describe next, so make sure you fully understand what it means and how write your code *the right way*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Having said that, **enabling dependency injection in your code is essential to be able to use test doubles**, including the mocks we describe next, so make sure you fully understand what it means and how to write your code *the right way*.
```

{: .callout}

## Introducing Google Mock

> [Google Mock], or gMock, is a framework for creating mock **classes** and using them in C++. A mock object implements the same interface as a real object (so it can be used as one), but lets you specify at run time how it will be used and what it should do, setting expectations on these interactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Google Mock], or gMock, is a framework for creating mock **classes** and using them in C++. A mock class implements the same interface as the real class (so it can be used as one), but lets you specify how it will be used and what it should do at runtime, setting expectations on these interactions.
```

Here we give a simple example to illustrate the process, but read the gMock [Mocking Cookbook] for a more detailed description of the possibilities and the inputs these macros need. Let's assume we want to mock the following abstract class because one of its subclasses is being used in the function we want to test (mocking virtual classes is way, way easier):

```cpp
class Animal {
  virtual ~Animal() {};
  virtual double walk(int steps);
  virtual void eat(double carbs);
  virtual void die();
};
```

The corresponding mocked class will be:

```cpp
class MockAnimal : public Animal {
 public:
  MOCK_METHOD(double, walk, (int), (override));
  MOCK_METHOD(void, eat, (double), (override));
  MOCK_METHOD(void, die, (), (override));
};
```

Now let's write a test for the following function, which finds out if an animal is dead or alive at the end of the day depending on how much food it has taken and how much it has walked.

> ```cpp
> bool is_alive_at_end_of_day(int steps, double carbs, Animal animal) {
>   double spent_carbs{animal::walk(steps)};
>   if (spent_carbs > carbs) {
>     animal::die();
>     return false;
>   }
>   animal::eat(carbs-spent_carbs);
>   return true;
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```cpp
bool is_alive_at_end_of_day(int steps, double carbs, Animal animal) {
  double spent_carbs{animal.walk(steps)};
  if (spent_carbs > carbs) {
    animal.die();
    return false;
  }
  animal.eat(carbs - spent_carbs);
  return true;
}
```
```

```cpp
using ::testing::Return;

TEST(IsAliveTest, Lives) {
  Animal animal = MockAnimal();
  int steps{400};
  double carbs{2000.0};
  double consumed{500.0};

  EXPECT_CALL(animal, walk(steps)).Times(1).WillOnce(Return(consumed));
  EXPECT_CALL(animal, eat(carbs-consumed)).Times(1);
  EXPECT_CALL(animal, die()).Times(0);
  ASSERT_TRUE(is_alive_at_end_of_day(steps, carbs, animal))
}

TEST(IsAliveTest, Dies) {
  Animal animal = MockAnimal();
  int steps{400};
  double carbs{2000.0};
  double consumed{5000.0};

  EXPECT_CALL(animal, walk(steps)).Times(1).WillOnce(Return(consumed));
  EXPECT_CALL(animal, eat(carbs-consumed)).Times(1);
  EXPECT_CALL(animal, die()).Times(1);
  ASSERT_FALSE(is_alive_at_end_of_day(steps, carbs, animal))
}
```

[Google Mock]: https://google.github.io/googletest/gmock_for_dummies.html
[Mocking Cookbook]: https://google.github.io/googletest/gmock_cook_book.html

> ### Mocking is not always the solution
>

> > In the above example, it would have been tricky to test the logic of the function in full without mocks. However, they are not always the solution. Mocks do not work with  top level functions, only with classes and, depending on the complexity of the class, setting up the mock might be too complicated and not worth it for testing the function of interest. Very often, stubs, fakes and dummies will carry you a long way before you need to use mocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> In the above example, it would have been tricky to test the logic of the function in full without mocks. However, they are not always the solution. Mocks do not work with  top level functions, only with classes. Depending on the complexity of the class, setting up the mock might be too complicated and not worth it for testing the function of interest. Very often, stubs, fakes and dummies will carry you a long way before you need to use mocks.
```

- "TBC"
objectives:
- "TBC"
keypoints:
- "TBC"
---

## Testing untestable code

Sooner or later you will face a piece of code that is not straightforward to write a test for. It might be because it calls a function that requests some data from a piece of hardware, or because it needs to access a database that is not available in the testing environment, or simply because it triggers a complex and time consuming computation process that is only suited to run in a supercomputer. Whatever the reason, you have a problem. Moreover, you might want to test if some intermediate result in the calculation is valid, and not just the final output.

There is one possible solution: replace the problematic function by another one that, for the purposes of the test, behaves in a similar manner but without the problematic functionality of the original one. These replacements are called **test doubles**.

### Test doubles

Test doubles are artificial replacements of functions or objects that prevent - or hinder - testing a particular part of the code. Depending on what these replacements do, and also on the programming language, they receive different names. From the [Wikipedia], we have:

> - **Test stub**: used for providing the tested code with "indirect input", i.e. canned answers so that the code can keep running.

Reviewer 3: Indirect input would generally mean the input to test function while canned answer may mean response/answer/output from the function. I got a bit confused while reading this and sorry for my understanding. 

It will be good if you can clarify in the text.

Author: I agree is rather confusing. Will try to clarify.

Author: After thinking about it, I think the text is correct, albeit I agree that might be confusing: a function that returns a canned answer within the function under test is providing an indirect input to that fiunction as opposed to a direct input provided in the function call. I've tried to clarified, removing the "canned" part.

Author: Fixed in 3d24302 ... hopefully!

{: .callout}

## Introducing Google Mock

[Google Mock], or gMock, is a framework for creating mock **classes** and using them in C++. A mock class implements the same interface as the real class (so it can be used as one), but lets you specify how it will be used and what it should do at runtime, setting expectations on these interactions.

It is worth emphasizing that gMock will let you mock **classes** and not top level functions.

The process of using gMock is, in general, always the same:

1. You [create the mocked class using the `MOCK_METHOD` macro](https://google.github.io/googletest/gmock_cook_book.html#creating-mock-classes) to mock the methods that will be used in the test.
2. When running the tests, you set the expectations of what should happen when each relevant mocked method is called [using the `EXPECT_CALL` macro](https://google.github.io/googletest/gmock_for_dummies.html#general-syntax). The expectations will be automatically checked at the end of the test.

> ### Mocking virtual classes

Reviewer 3: I tried to look at few resources to find out about the term `Virtual Classes`. I am not sure if this is actually a valid concept in C++. Please point me to some relevant resources if you think otherwise.

C++ has a concept of `Virtual base class` but that is mostly in [inheritance and serves a different purpose](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/21558/in-c-what-is-a-virtual-base-class). I think you were trying to explain or talk about `Abstract classes`.

Author: Your absolutely rigth: abstract classes with virtual methods. Will clarify the text.

Author: Fixed in 537759e , alongside updating some code snippets.

Following with the above example, let's assume that now we don't have an `Animal` abstract class, but rather a concrete `Horse` class with the same interface.

```cpp
class Horse {
  public:
    ~Horse() {};
    double walk(int steps);
    void eat(double carbs);
    void die();
};
```

Mocking the above will look very similar except that we will be creating a brand new class altogether, not be inheriting from any other class, and we will omit the `override` parameter. Contrary to the case of virtual classes, here we only need to indicate the methods that will actually be used in the tests.

```cpp
class MockHorse {
  public:
    MOCK_METHOD(double, walk, (int));
    MOCK_METHOD(void, eat, (double));
    MOCK_METHOD(void, die, ());
};
```

The function we want to test is the same, except that now only accept `Horse` as input:

```cpp
bool isAliveAtEndOfDay(int steps, double carbs, Horse animal) {
  // as above
};
```

> How do we test this? Well, we will need to modify our function to use templates, and indicate when the function is supposed to use a `Horse` instance and when a `MockHorse` instance. Contrary to the case of virtual classes above, this is fixed at compilation time rather than at runtime:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How do we test this? Well, we will need to modify our function to use templates, and indicate when the function is supposed to use a `Horse` instance or a `MockHorse` instance. Contrary to the case of virtual classes above, this is fixed at compilation time rather than at runtime:
```

{: .callout}

## Test doubles in action

In this section we present a few exercises with their solutions of using test doubles to enable the testing of untestable code. In all cases, we assume that dependency injection is enabled, one way or another.

Keep in mind that there are often multiple ways of using test doubles for a particular problem, so you might come up with a different solution for the exercises below.

> ## Test `normalize_v2`
>
> Write a test using the Google Tests tools described in previous chapters to check that `normalize_v2`, as defined above, behaves as it should.
>
> > ## Solution
> >
> > In this case, a simple fake will solve our problem. Let's define our fake function as:
> >
> > ```cpp
> > double norm_stub(int array[])
> > {
> >     return 10.0;
> > };
> > ```
> >
> > And then we write the test as:
> >
> > ```cpp
> > TEST(NormalizeTest, ResultCorrect) {
> >
> >     double factor{norm_stub([])};
> >     int length{3};
> >     int input[length]{1, 2, 3};
> >     int copy[length]{1, 2, 3};
> >
> >     normalize_v2(input, length, norm_stub);
> >
> >     for (int i{0}; i < length; ++i)
> >     {
> >         EXPECT_EQ(input[i] * factor, copy[i]);

> > >     };

Reviewer 3: I think there is difference between the code in the original file `test_dependency_injection.cpp` and code section given here. Please correct the same.

Author: Yep, I've not updated the lesson as the correctness of the code was not clear - and it was not, as you're pointing out. I'll do that as the last thing.

Author: Fixed in 2056d79 , now that the code is correct.
